# Outline

An agency is a fiduciary relationship created by an express or implied contract or by law, in which one party (the agent) may act on behalf of another party (the principal) and bind that party by words or actions. 

Requirements for an agency relationship include consent by both the principal and the agent that the agent will act for the principal's benefit, and the agent is subject to the principal's control. The principal can end the relationship at will.

An express agency relationship is created in many ways, including through contract.

A principal is bound by the acts of an agent done within the scope of the agent's authority. Thus, an agent has a duty to comply with all lawful instructions received from the principal. If the agent fails to obey the principal's instructions, the agent is liable to the principal.

Generally speaking, a principal may not be held liable for the acts of an agent that occurred prior to the commencement of the agency. However, if a person ratifies the unauthorized acts of another, and has received and accepted the benefits accruing from those acts, that person may be bound as a principal.

# Hospitals

In general, a hospital is not vicariously liable for the negligence of a physician who is an independent contractor and simply uses the hospital’s facilities to provide treatment to his own patients. However, if the patient looked to the hospital to provide medical treatment, and the hospital made a representation that medical treatment would be afforded by physicians working at the hospital, an agency by estoppel may be found.

# Ostensible Agency

An agency is ostensible when the principal intentionally, or by want of ordinary care, causes a third person to believe him to be the principal’s agent when he is not actually employed by the principal. There are three elements necessary to establish the creation of an ostensible agency: (1) the person dealing with the agent must do so with belief in the agent’s authority and this belief must be a reasonable one, (2) the belief must be generated by some act or neglect on the part of the principal sought to be charged, and (3) the person relying on the agent’s authority must not himself be guilty of negligence. 

# Violation of fiduciary duty

An agent owes a duty of good faith to the principal and is not permitted to act for himself at the principal's expense during the course of the agency. All profits made in the execution of a fiduciary's agency belong to the principal and the agent has a duty to account to the principal. An agent is not permitted to personally profit from the agency relationship except to the extent that the agreement permits it or the principal expressly assents.

# Equal dignities rule

Under the Equal dignities rule, when the act performed by an agent on behalf of the brincipal is required by law to be in writing, the agent's authority must also be established in writing.
